„Who‟s there? Artyom - go have a look!‟
Artyom rose reluctantly from his seat by the fire and, shifting the machine gun from his back to his
chest, headed towards the darkness. He stood right at the edge of the lighted area and then, as loudly
and threateningly as he could, he clicked the slide on his gun and shouted gruffly, „Stop! Password!‟
He could hear quick, staccato footsteps in the darkness where moments ago he‟d heard a strange
rustle and hollow-sounding murmurings. Someone was retreating into the depths of the tunnel,
frightened away by Artyom‟s gruff voice and the rattling of his weapon. Artyom hurriedly returned to
the fire and flung an answer at Pyotr Andreevich:
„Nope, no one came forward. No response, they just ran off.‟
„You idiot! You were clearly told. If they don‟t respond, then shoot immediately! How do you
know who that was? Maybe the dark ones are getting closer!‟
„No . . . I don‟t think they were people . . . The sounds were really strange . . . And the footsteps
weren‟t human either. What? You think I don‟t know what human footsteps sound like? And anyway,
when have the dark ones ever run off like that? You know it yourself, Pyotr Andreevich. Lately they‟ve
been lunging forward without hesitation. They attacked a patrol with nothing but their bare hands,
marching straight into machine-gun fire. But this thing, it ran off straight away . . . Like some kind of
scared animal.‟
„All right, Artyom! You‟re too smart for your own good. But you‟ve got instructions - so follow
them, don‟t think about it. Maybe it was a scout. And now it knows how few of us are here, and how
much ammunition they‟d need . . . They might just wipe us out here and now for fun. Put a knife to our
throat, and butcher the entire station, just like at Polezhaevskaya - and all just because you didn‟t get
rid of that rat . . . Watch it! Next time I‟ll make you run after them into the tunnel!‟
It made Artyom shudder to imagine the tunnel beyond the seven-hundredth metre. It was horrifying
just to think about it. No one had the guts to go beyond the seven-hundredth metre to the north. Patrols
had made it to the five-hundredth, and having illuminated the boundary post with the spotlight on the
trolley and convinced themselves that no scum had crossed it, they hastily returned. Even the scouts -
big guys, former marines - would stop at the six hundred and eightieth metre. They‟d turn their burning
cigarettes into their cupped palms and stand stock-still, clinging to their night-vision instruments. And
then, they‟d slowly, quietly head back, without taking their eyes off the tunnel, and never turning their
backs to it.
